layout: post
Title: Game Review: Fallout 4
date: 2015-12-20
Category: Reviews
Slug: game-review-fallout-4
Tags: Video Games

_[I completed this review after playing_ Fallout 4 _for a total of 25 hours. I
completed the main quest line during my play through.]_

_Fallout 4_ is the latest in Bethesda's revival of Black Isle Studios' beloved
post-apocalyptic role playing series, and like its predecessors it has met with
much praise and market success. But I find myself unable to quite grasp the
popularity of the game, because also like its predecessors, _Fallout 4_'s
impressive scale and ambitious design are hamstrung by some major flaws in the
execution.<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

I've really come to dislike the aesthetic of the _Fallout_ series, and I'm
disappointed that it hasn't really evolved at all over the years; the D.C. of
_Fallout 3_ is not very distinct from New Vegas, and even less so from Boston in
_Fallout 4_. Does everything have to be so drab and gray and dirty, so dead and
devoid of plant life? I get that the world is supposed to be a wasteland
shattered by nuclear warfare, but I don't think this design choice was made for
the sake of realism (and I don't think it _is_ realistic anyhow). More likely,
Bethesda is taking design cues from the original series. But when so much of the
game has evolved, the dull environment hardly seems worth hanging onto.
Furthermore, I can't help but feel that Bethesda has used this theme of
dilapidation as an excuse to cut some corners when designing the world. Little
care has been taken to prevent objects from clipping through each other and
through the world geometry, and this frequently results in getting stuck on the
strewn garbage, or being unable to jump over or crouch under objects that look
like they should be navigable.

These are hardly the worst of the bugs you'll encounter, though. About
two-thirds of the way through the main quest, I encountered a game-breaking bug
where a door didn't unlock as it should have, leaving me stuck in a room I
couldn't leave.  Luckily, I was able to get around this by turning off clipping,
but had I been playing on console I probably would have just been screwed. The
PC version isn't without its own problems, though. Performance varies a great
deal between different areas, and some scenes&mdash;simple indoor scenes,
even&mdash;can bring relatively powerful hardware to its knees. And, as usual,
the menu system was clearly designed for consoles and not changed at all when
the game was ported, which makes navigating the menus painfully slow&mdash;a big
pain point in a game which is so menu-driven.

The plot doesn't fair much better. The game's introduction is boring and
clich√©d, and things hardly improve from there. The introduction attempts to
build emotional attachment and set up the protagonist's motivations, but its
rushed nature and predictability make it fall completely flat. Beyond its
failure to have the intended emotional effect, the attempt to establish a
meaningful backstory for the protagonist is a questionable decision, even in
theory, in this sort of game.  The appeal of the series is, to a large extent,
that it's open ended and non-linear.  Some players will follow the main quest
line to its conclusion, but many more won't, and for them the one-size-fits-all
introduction could hamper immersion by robbing them of the chance to fully
construct their own characters.

The tedious introduction is crucial to the plot of the main quest, so I'd be
more forgiving if the main quest were really spectacular, but it's not.  There
are some high points, where mystery and suspense propel the story forward, but
the questions raised are always followed by disappointing answers, and the whole
thing is constantly hampered by mediocre voice acting. Events that should be
heart-wrenching are portrayed with about the level of emotion you'd expect from
someone who missed her bus and had to wait 30 minutes for the next one, and
life-or-death situations seem to always heed a sort of detached overconfidence,
as though the characters all know that it's just a video game. I don't entirely
blame the actors, though. Good acting requires a sense of a character's
personality and motivations, and most of the characters in Fallout 4 lack both
of those aspects. There are a handful of exceptions, such as Nick Valentine, but
they can't save the rest of the cast.

It doesn't help that the character models have a very limited set of expressions
and animations to visualize their emotions with. Granted, not every game can be
_The Last of Us_, and perhaps it's kind of unfair to even expect that sort of
fidelity in an open-world game; it's like complaining that a
choose-your-own-adventure book doesn't have the depth of a novel. But Rockstar
does a pretty good job with _Grand Theft Auto_, whereas Bethesda seems to be
constantly behind the state-of-the-art, despite everyone _always_ complaining
about this in every review of a Bethesda game. At any rate, the combination of
shallow, often nonsensical writing and tepid acting result in an uninspiring
story, which I expect I'll have forgotten entirely in a matter of months.

On the bright side, combat has improved since _Fallout 3_. The addition of
ironsights is a welcome change; it allows for more precise aiming while also
adding a sense of authenticity. It also ties in well with the impressive weapon
modification system, which allows you to select from a variety of different
sights and scopes, and craft mods that change various characteristics such as
fire rate, damage, and accuracy.  However, the guns still don't have the feeling
of weight and impact that they do in pure FPS games such as _Battlefield_ and
_Call of Duty_. I think this is partly an issue inherent to the RPG-FPS
genre&mdash;no gun feels powerful when it takes 37 headshots to kill a
high-level enemy&mdash;but it's also a matter of animation and sound design, and
neither are stellar here.

The most significant addition to the game, and in my opinion also the best, is
"settlements," which are areas of the map in which you can build your own little
oases of safety by placing structures and resources. Once you have set up a
settlement, NPCs will travel to it, and you can assign them to produce resources
or act as guards, as you see fit. You can scavenge building materials from scrap
you find in the settlement area or from junk items found elsewhere in the
wasteland, which is a nice touch because it gives these items some real value
rather than just having them be "vendor trash" as they are in most RPGs. There
are a variety of fixtures that can be constructed with the right
components&mdash;furniture, water pumps, food crops, generators, turrets,
and more. Switches and computer terminals can be used to control the flow of
electricity or set behaviors on certain objects, which allows for some
interesting creative applications. As your settlement grows, it will attract
more friendly NPCs, and you can construct shops and set up trade routes. But
prosperous settlements also attract the attention of raiders, necessitating the
aforementioned defenses&mdash;or, if you're around, you can help defend the settlement
yourself.

The settlement system is the most novel aspect of Fallout 4, and also among the
most fun. But even so, it feels somewhat aimless and lacks a sense of necessity
or challenge. You set up a few beds, plant some food, add turrets for defense,
and... then what? My settlements never got raided, or if they did, I didn't
notice.  There was little incentive for me to build further once I'd established
the basics. It's a cool little addition, but if base-building is what you're
looking for, there are countless other games that do it better, and nothing
unique about _Fallout 4_'s implementation.

Despite my complaints, _Fallout 4_ isn't a bad game. It has a ton of
content&dash;a whole world to explore, with interesting little surprises all
over the place. The many game systems provide numerous ways to play, meaning
everyone is likely to find something to like. But folk wisdom about trying to
please everyone applies here: it's impossible, and in attempting to do it you
typically end up doing many things decently but never doing anything
_excellently_. I'm a bit disappointed in the _Fallout_ series' repeated failure
to live up to  its potential. These games could be amazing; they have a foot in
the door to greatness already.  Unfortunately, Bethesda has never quite been
able to step across the threshold.
