layout: post
Title: Review: Made in Abyss: Binary Star Falling into Darkness
date: 2023-08-20
Category: Reviews
Slug: review-made-in-abyss
Tags: Video games

I wrote this review for Steam, but it was too long to post in its entirety there, so I'm posting it here instead.

[_Made in Abyss: Binary Star Falling Into Darkness_](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1324340/Made_in_Abyss_Binary_Star_Falling_into_Darkness/) is not the game that an amazing series like _Made in Abyss_ deserves. It's janky, buggy, unpolished, and frustrating in several ways. That said, it's the only _Made in Abyss_ game we have for now, and for those of us who have already watched the anime and read the manga, it's the only other official content to tide us over until the next volumes and seasons come out, which could be years from now. And despite the jank, it's not a terrible game&mdash;in fact, it kept me pretty engaged throughout the 45+ hours it took to complete it, and I even enjoyed it enough to come back and finish off the remaining achievements so I could 100% it[^achievements]. But the game also has a list of flaws so long that I struggled to enumerate them all even in this dissertation of a review, and some of them are fairly egregious. As such, I can only recommend the game to die-hard _Made in Abyss_ fans who are desperate for new content, and even then, only if it's on sale for at least 50% off of its regular price of $60 USD.

_Binary Star Falling into Darkness_ is split into two parts, "Hello Abyss," which is basically a tutorial that recaps the first half of season 1 <span class="spoiler">(up until Riko and Reg depart from Seeker Camp)</span>, and "Deep in Abyss" in which you create your own adolescent cave raider and work your way up from being a lowly bell rank to a legendary White Whistle. 

Hello Abyss can be finished in about three to four hours, but despite its brevity, it's barely worth playing unless you want the achievements. It's missing a lot of the mechanics that make the rest of the game interesting, and the retelling of Riko and Reg's story is absymal. It doesn't do the anime or the manga justice at all. While they did at least get the same voice actors from the anime, the developers didn't license any of the animation, except for a few intro scenes. Instead, they rely on poorly animated in-engine cutscenes that lack any of the emotional impact of the anime. Based on the credits, I think this entire section of the game was outsourced to another studio, and it really shows in the lack of quality throughout. **Absolutely do not let this be your introduction to the series, because it will spoil the anime/manga for you, and they are dramatically better.**

Also missing from _Binary Star Falling Into Darkness_ is Kevin Penkin's amazing original soundtrack from the anime. It's a big part of what makes the anime so excellent, and I was initially disappointed that it wasn't licensed for the game either. That said, the game has its own original soundtrack which ranges from decent to quite good&mdash;though still nowhere near as good as Penkin's work. It would have been amazing if they could have contracted him to make new music specifically for the game, but I suspect they didn't have the budget for that.

Deep in Abyss is much better, and I found myself mostly enjoying the dozens of hours I sunk into it despite all its faults. This mode gives you the experience that one would imagine a typical cave raider in Orth has: preparing for your trip, delving into the abyss, collecting as many relics and other materials as you can carry, and trying to make it back to the surface alive while surviving the threat posed by primeval creatures and the curse of the abyss. I found this gameplay loop quite addictive, and though it does get repetitive&mdash;especially towards the end of the game where levelling, questing and crafting all become a serious grind&mdash;it always feels like there's more to discover. There's also a new original story "supervised by Akihito Tsukushi" that progresses along with the player character's growing cave raiding prowess, and while it provided enough context to keep me motivated through the grind, it lacks any of the depth of the main series, and the ending was fairly unsatisfying. <span style="spoiler">There are a few places where this new story crosses over with Riko and Reg's adventures, which made for good fan service, but didn't make sense chronologically and lacked any sense of importance given that it's all obviously non-canon.</spoiler>

(Side note: <spoiler>when you reach the Ido Front base, it looks like it has already been wrecked by the fight between Reg and Bondrewd, but that clearly hasn't happened yet because Prushka is still alive, and Reg and Riko have not yet reached the base</spoiler>. Was there some major miscommunication about when in the timeline this was supposed to have occurred?)

The effects of the curse/strains of ascension are fairly well done. The first and second layers cause only minor inconveniences. But in the third layer, <span style="spoiler">your controls get randomized and you start to hallucinate</span>. This isn't too much of a problem if you're in a safe spot, but if you're being attacked or trying to scale a cliff, it can prove deadly. That said, the fifth layer effect is a bit disappointing: it should have been more like how it's depicted in _Dawn of the Deep Soul,_ i.e. <span style="spoiler">causing loss of the senses leading to self-harm</span>. Instead, it just <span style="spoiler">makes your character invisible for some reason and drains your health.</spoiler>

I've seen other reviews and YouTube videos describe _Binary Star Falling Into Darkness_ as being a particularly difficult game, but I think this is not quite accurate. It's not hard, per se, but it can be very _punishing_. There are many ways to get stuck which can cause you to lose hours of progress. You can delve too deep and end up not having the resources to get back (more on this below). You can also follow a path downward only to later realize that there's no way back up that path if you didn't put a rope out beforehand. There is usually (but not always!) an alternate route available somewhere, even if one exists, finding it before running out of resources can be easier said than done. To mitigate these issues, make sure you save frequently and keep multiple different saves at different points! It's good to keep rotating saves so you always have the option to go back to a "safe" spot.

Also limiting the difficulty is that enemy AI is practically non-existent. Contrary to how the primeval creatures of the deep abyss are portrayed as vicious and cunning in the anime and manga, enemies in the game mostly just stand in place and rotate around, casting attacks at random. Most of them will also leash if you get more than a few meters away, which means you can always just run past them (and usually should do so to conserve resources). The most dangerous and annoying enemies are the flying and climbing ones that harass you while you're trying to scale cliffs; the <span style="spoiler">madokajacks in the third layer</span> are especially aggravating. Exacerbating this is the fact that most enemies respawn constantly without end. There is a mod to disable this behavior; I can completely understand why many players would want such a mod.

There are a handful of forced fights in the game, including boss fights with <span style="spoiler">Interference Units</span> at the bottom of each layer. Sadly, none of the boss fights are mechanically challenging, either. Rather, they're pure gear checks, exacerbating the aforementioned resource management issues. You must have strong enough weapons to kill the boss before they break; if they do break and you don't have the materials to craft new ones, you can't fight back at all. Your only option at that point is to reload your previous save.

Level design is a mixed bag. I think the game does a decent job of reimagining the abyss as a 3D game world and fleshing out some of the parts that we didn't see much of in the main series. However, the second and third layers are tedious and frustrating to navigate. Granted, this is partly due to the developers having to design the maps around established lore and the locations depicted in the anime/manga, but I still think these layers could have been more interesting and less aggravating. For one, it would help if the in-game map weren't nearly useless. The world design of _Made in Abyss_ is all about verticality, down to little details like the vertical layout of the classroom at Belchero Orphanage. This extends to the game as well, and yet the in-game map is shown from a top-down 2D perspective, with no way to distinguish which elevation the map markers are located at. _Who thought this was a good idea?_

Backpack management is tedious and is something you have to do constantly. You start the game with a fairly low weight limit, and a lot of it will always be taken up by your clothing and necessary gear like weapons, ropes and food. When you excavate a relic node, you don't know in advance whether you'll get a cheap but lightweight resource like a flash stone, or an expensive but heavy relic. If you become overencumbered, you can still walk slowly, but you can't perform most other actions like walking, climbing, or transitioning between stages. So you'll constantly be having to discard the least valuable items from your backpack. I wish there were an option to ignore certain resources so I didn't have to waste time picking up and discarding useless stones when I'm trying to complete a gathering quest. <span style="spoiler">Bafflingly, once you unlock the ability to fast travel between layers, you can still do that even while overencumbered.</span>

Weapons break far too easily, perhaps even easier than those in _Breath of the Wild_. Durability systems in games are often irritating, but I don't mind them so much when they suit the gameplay and the experience the game is trying to evoke, which is certainly the case with _Made in Abyss'_ theme of survival in a hostile environment. But a 2kg metal pickaxe shouldn't shatter into pieces after whacking half a dozen rodents. Strangely, excavating relics and resources doesn't reduce your pickaxe's durability, and in fact you can even excavate without a pickaxe in your inventory at all. Inconsistences like these feel like there was a serious lack of attention to detail from the developers.

Most weapons require animal bone to craft, which only drops from&mdash;you guessed it&mdash;animals. And only certain ones, at that. But you need weapons to kill animals, so if you ever break your last weapon and don't have enough material to craft new ones, you're just screwed. You can't even punch enemies for miniscule damage. And as mentioned above, there are some forced fights, and some inescapable quests that require you to gather meat from animals. If you stumble into one of these without a weapon, well, I hope you saved recently because you have no other recourse.

Likewise, you can run out of food and have no way to gather more, effectively trapping you. Almost every recipe besides the very basic ones requires salt, so if you don't bring enough you won't be able to cook food, even if you have tons of other ingredients (salt cannot be found in the game world, only purchased from the store). You might as well just always carry 50+ salt with you once you hit black whistle&mdash;it means sacrificing 250g of available weight, but it's better than getting stuck in the bottom of the abyss without enough food to get back out. You can always escape by "giving up," but by doing so you lose all of your progress for the current delve, including relics and resources collected and quest progress.

The way relics are used in the game is disappointingly boring. They're effectively just glorified vendor trash and crafting materials. I do like that selling relics is one of the primary means of leveling up, given that that's precisely the job of a cave raider. But there should have been at least some relics with gameplay effects (sun spheres don't count). I was excited to finally unlock <span style="spoiler">the ability to craft relic weapons and armor</span>, but even these don't have any unique animations or effects. <span style="spoiler">They're just stronger version of the same four weapon archetypes you start the game with (pickaxe, hatchet, gun, bow). At one point you find a thousand-men pin, but it's for a quest and you have no option to use it.</span> This feels like a major missed opportunity, not only for how it could have expanded gameplay variety, but also because it could have helped explain why <spoiler>the player character eventually becomes insanely overpowered compared to established lore, being able to beat both Ozen and Bondrewd in duels without any kind of augmentation.</span>

In addition to poor design decisions and lackluster combat, _Binary Star Falling into Darkness_ has an overall feeling of jankiness and lack of polish, as well as a several outright bugs. For example, you can exploit the stamina mechanic when climbing by standing on top of (most) relic nodes that jut out from walls. You can also exploit it when descending by dropping off the wall (neutral jump instead of downwards jump) and grabbing back on, which uses no stamina. Sometimes you  can fall off a wall from a height that should be deadly, but inexplicably take no damage. If you excavate while on a wall and end up with too much weight, you'll fall off, but if you're quick enough, you can pause, discard some times, and you'll be able to grab back onto the wall before you fall to your death. I doubt any of these things were intentional.

Some enemies and resource nodes that are supposed to stick to walls will occasionally spawn floating several feet in front of the wall. If you're interrupted by an enemy attack at certain points in the animation when catching a fish, the fish can either bug out such that it can no longer be caught, or disappear altogether. There are graphical glitches, too; a frequent one I encounter is that water will briefly stop rendering before popping back into existence. And while falling to your death is an expected risk in the abyss, there are also places where you can fall out of the map geometry due to walls or floors that weren't properly connected.

To summarize: _Binary Star Falling Into Darkness_ is not a bad game, but it's certainly not great either. It's just passable. And that's a shame, because the series it's based on is so much more, and the game could have been too with more care and attention to detail, and perhaps a slightly larger budget. I think most of the things I've complained about could be fixed by modders; in fact, I know that some of them already have been. The core game is solid enough that I've enjoyed my time with it, even without any such mods. But I still wouldn't recommend it to anyone who isn't already a big fan of _Made in Abyss_, and above all, I really hope that some day the franchise gets a higher quality game, as it truly deserves.

[^achievements]: I got all of the achievements, but did not finish all of the optional quests. They're exceptionally grindy and provide no benefit once you've finished the main game content.